[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> REGINA MEREDITH: Something
has gone terribly wrong with
the way in which our children's
bodies are developing.
One-third of all our kids
now suffer collectively
from allergies, autism,
ADHD, and asthma,
according to the book,
"Unhealthy Truth",
by Robyn O'Brien.
As a successful businesswoman
in the financial sector,
Robyn watched helpless as her
baby's face swelled and turned
red, having no idea what
was happening to her.
Today, she speaks to
parents all over the world
through her website,
Allergy Kids,
as a warrior for
education on why
our kids are sicker than ever.
You are a warrioress, and
I'm so happy to have you
with us here today.
Because a lot of people will
be looking in hindsight.
I mean, my child's long-grown,
and of childbearing age himself
now, or, well, child-rearing
age, shall we say.
But most people in that
day then, and decades past,
had no idea what was wrong when
these little kids developed
these symptoms, and
you've been through it.
You've been through some really
tough stuff with your kids.
Let's talk about who
you were, and why
this happened in your life.
Because you're an unlikely
hero in this area, really.
>> ROBYN O'BRIEN: I mean, I was
not looking for it, you know?
I was the oldest of
four kids and had
had these four little kids,
kind of, boom, boom, boom.
And really expected
everything to keep
on rolling along
as it always had.
My older three were fine.
I had not given much
thought to anything
like food allergies, or asthma,
or any of these conditions
that are now impacting
so many of the kids.
And then when our fourth child
was a baby about seven years
ago, she just had this allergic
reaction over breakfast.
And the breakfast that
morning was just what
I've trusted to feed my kids.
They were brands that
I had grown up eating.
friends and family had eaten.
Didn't think anything of it.
It was waffles, and
tubes of blue yogurt,
and some scrambled eggs.
>> REGINA: Tubes of blue yogurt.
>> O'BRIEN: It was
tubes of blue yogurt.
>> REGINA: Low-key there.
>> O'BRIEN: And
you know, I just--
>> REGINA: I laughed when
I read that in your book.
>> O'BRIEN: Well, you know,
I mean you figure that
if it's on the grocery
store shelf, it's fine.
Somebody's done the homework.
>> REGINA: Yeah, right.
>> O'BRIEN: And so as her face
started swelling shut that
morning, I was so clueless.
I was so completely clueless.
What in the world is
happening to this child?
I looked at the older
three and I thought maybe
they had put
something in her face
when I'd had my back turned--
>> REGINA: Right.
>> O'BRIEN: --fixing breakfast.
And they just gave me those
blank little kid stares.
They just stood there.
And that was when my heart
just started to race.
And I thought, what is
happening to my child?
And I raced her to the doctor
and the doctor's saying, well,
Robyn, there are these
top eight allergens today,
and children are
increasingly allergic.
And I'm thinking, since when?
Because I didn't
know anybody that
had had these food
allergies as a kid.
PB & J, or a carton of milk,
those weren't loaded weapons.
>> REGINA: You mean
when you were a kid?
>> O'BRIEN: Yeah,
when I was a kid.
>> REGINA: That's right.
And back in those days,
there wasn't the kind
of allergic reaction
to all of this, which
we'll talk about
in a little bit.
I mean, this is really
a new phenomenon.
>> O'BRIEN: It was new.
And so I'm standing
there thinking,
I don't know how to deal with
this, and what in the world
is this child going
to eat, you know?
So that moment where
your ability to parent
is just completely challenged,
and it was a terrifying moment.
But we got her calmed down, and
everything was under control,
and we got the kids home.
And truly, at that
point, I really
wanted to try to understand
what was happening.
I wanted to understand what
was happening to these kids.
And as I really started into
the research, and at that point,
it was just what
is a food allergy,
and why are so
many kids allergic?
>> REGINA: OK.
Now, before we launch into that,
just take a couple of minutes
to let people know more about
who you were at that time.
What your life was like.
It was a very
different kind of life
than what you're doing now.
>> O'BRIEN: Oh, yeah.
>> REGINA: High-powered
financial sector stuff, so.
>> O'BRIEN: Yeah, you know,
I grew up in Houston, Texas,
and I had gone to business
school on full scholarship.
I had graduated
the top my class.
I was recruited by
companies like Enron.
You know, I went full steam
into the financial world.
It was my passion.
I loved it.
We had an amazing
team of seven guys,
and we covered a whole
bunch of industries.
And being the only
woman on the team,
they said, you're going to cover
the food industry, you know?
And at that point, I mean,
I didn't know how to cook.
I burnt noodles.
>> REGINA: Well, you bought
little tubes of blue yogurt.
>> O'BRIEN: I mean, I was
really, so I thought, OK,
this is just crunching numbers.
This is meeting
management teams.
I can do it.
May not be the industry I would
have chosen, but I can do it.
And so we met with the
management teams from everyone
from Walmart, to Costco, to
Kroger, Safeway, Whole Foods.
And I mean, the Whole Foods
and Wild Oats, at the time,
those management teams
would come into our offices,
and they would order these
veggie subs, you know.
And we were down in
Texas, and we would just
dismiss it, really, as this
kind of marketing niche
that they had carved out.
And so you know, that
had been my background.
Let's analyze the numbers.
Let's figure out the best way
to maximize shareholder return.
And in hindsight, you know,
now I look back on that.
I'm like, thank
goodness the guys
made me cover the food industry.
But as we moved to Colorado
and I traded the diaper bag
for a brief-- I mean, traded
the briefcase for a diaper bag,
I always thought I would
go back into finance.
I loved it.
I absolutely loved it.
And that had always
been my intention,
that once the kids were
up and running in school,
that I would go back
into the finance world.
And so that morning,
little did I
know that my whole
life was gonna change.
Everything that I had
planned, everything
that I thought I
knew, and everything
that I had mapped out just
suddenly took this huge detour.
>> REGINA: Right.
OK, so because we can tell
what your personality's like,
obviously, you're
someone who is going
to-- you're going to
strive to be the best
and know the most you possibly
can at whatever you take on.
And now you were a ferocious
mother on top of it.
So yes.
>> O'BRIEN: Well,
you know, exactly.
So you know, here I
was, and I had always
been the first born
of four children,
and inherited all
those type A genes,
and I had thrown that into
everything I'd never done,
whether it was sports
in school or academics.
And suddenly, I'm sitting
there feeling completely
incompetent, completely
illiterate, and I thought,
I have got to school
myself on this
and began just this massive
education, you know?
And it was as simple as,
what is a food allergy?
Because I didn't even know
what a food allergy was.
All I was being told was
that it could kill a child,
and that it had this varying
range, and you didn't know,
there was no predictability.
And I just thought, this
is absolutely terrifying.
And so I began that morning with
learning that a food allergy is
when your body sees
food as foreign
and it just launches
this response
to drive out that
foreign invader.
So in some cases it's mild.
It's runny nose or watery
eyes, and in some cases,
it can be this life-threatening
allergic reaction where things
start to swell shut, and your
body starts to shut down.
And there was really
no way of knowing
one way or the other which
was going to happen next,
and that unpredictability, to
me, was absolutely terrifying.
And so as I began looking
at the data, thinking again,
I didn't know anyone had a food
allergy when we were children,
and yet, now,
there are a growing
number of American
children that were
increasingly allergic to food.
And as I looked at
the data that morning,
I learned that, from
1997 until 2002,
there had been a doubling
of the peanut allergy.
I mean, that is in
a five-year span.
That is a shocking statistic
to me as a number cruncher.
>> REGINA: Yes, it is.
>> O'BRIEN: And I'm, like,
that's not something--
your genetics don't
change that quickly.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> O'BRIEN: There's something
in the environment--
>> REGINA: Something's
been injected into.
Yeah.
>> REGINA: --that changed.
And as I began looking at the
data, at that point in time,
seven years ago, one out of
17 kids under the age of three
had a food allergy.
Today that number,
only seven years later,
is now one out of 13.
And you walk in any
preschool and you
know these numbers to be true
because of the EpiPens that
have to be stocked
on those shelves.
So as I continued
to do the research,
I was learning things
later on about how
the Centers for Disease Control
was seeing an escalating
rate in the
hospitalizations related
to food allergic reactions.
So on the one hand,
the idea was still
being presented in the media
seven years ago as sort
of maybe these were moms
just clamoring for attention,
or self-diagnosing, or claiming
that their children had
these issues.
But then the CDC
started to come through
with this hard data
saying, you know
what, these are
hospitalizations related
to food allergic reactions.
A 265% increase where
doctors are checking people
into the ER because of this.
It was just like what I had
been through with my daughter.
And so as I started
looking at that data again,
it was just like,
what has changed?
What has changed?
>> REGINA: So when you started
your journey to educate
yourself, were you going
to official sources,
kind of, mainstream
sources, initially, or--?
>> O'BRIEN: Initially, I was.
And I felt like, again,
I had this background
in business and finance.
I knew that I had found this
passion, I mean, as any mother,
to protect the
health of your child.
I mean, that is absolutely
your first and foremost duty.
And so all of a
sudden, I was thinking,
how can I leverage this
skill set, what I am,
this background,
into helping advance
this space for the
health of my children.
And so you know, I was reaching
out to different groups,
and I wasn't getting
exactly a warm response.
And one of the things
that really bothered me
was that, at the time, in
the food allergy space,
if you wanted to know
more about food allergies,
it was a membership
subscription-based model,
and you had to pay money.
And I looked at that and I
thought, if my child had just
been diagnosed with
diabetes, I wouldn't
be having to pay money
to learn about diabetes.
Why am I being asked to pay
money on food allergy research?
And so I felt that
there was an opportunity
to launch a really simple
website at the time that just
gave parents not only the
information they needed,
the basic information,
but I also
could see that there was a
real need for a community,
you know, that this was
something that none of us
had chosen, and it sort
of imposed these hardships
and restrictions, and
you felt quite isolated.
Communities, and schools,
and family members,
even, weren't quite ready to
accept the enormity of what
the condition was until we
really needed each other.
And so we started Allergy Kids
just with that goal in mind.
And I thought, at the time,
if I can help raise awareness,
maybe help raise money for
these larger organizations,
these nonprofits in
the space, that's
what we were going to do.
>> REGINA: Well, and you did.
And as you said, it was not
necessarily a warm welcome.
And let's talk about
F-A-N-N, just for starters.
Let's talk about your experience
with who the group is,
what you tried to do, and
what the reaction was.
>> O'BRIEN: So you know,
I started with this little
symbol, and I thought, you know,
we're just going to use this
little sticker like the Mr.
Yuck sticker I'd had as a kid.
I wanted to create a little
sticker or symbol that
could just be used in a
lunchroom to sort of help
identify where
these kids might be.
And CNN loved it, and
they contacted me.
We launched Allergy Kids'
site on Mother's Day,
and they contacted
me a few weeks later,
and the weekend of
Father's Day, I was on CNN.
And I was really--
>> REGINA: How did you get
yourself out there so quickly?
>> O'BRIEN: I really
think it was just--
>> REGINA: Just an idea
whose time had come.
>> O'BRIEN: --time
had come, you know?
And I was passionate, and
I could articulate it.
And so CNN, they had me on.
I had never done any major
interview at that point,
you know?
I'm in a dark room, staring
straight into this camera.
And thankfully, the
interviewer was really kind.
She really got it, you know?
She wasn't dismissive at all.
She said, this is a real
problem, we've got these kids,
and this mom has
proposed a solution.
And it just went around
the food allergy world.
Well, interestingly, there was a
nonprofit that was based in DC,
and it's like they had an
allergic reaction to me.
I mean, it was like, it
didn't go through them,
and so they were not
comfortable with that it had not
gone through them,
that suddenly there
was another organization that
was out there in the press,
bringing attention
to this issue.
So at that point, I
thought, I must have somehow
misconveyed myself.
Surely they need to
know that, like, I'm
trying to raise money
and raise awareness
for this organization
and this effort.
>> REGINA: For
their organization.
>> O'BRIEN: Exactly.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> O'BRIEN: And so,
you know, again,
it was just this push
back, and this push back.
And after probably
two or three times,
including some pretty
negative emails that got
blasted out to, kind of,
this food allergy space
about the work that
I was doing, again,
I just thought, this
makes absolutely no sense.
This makes no sense.
I'm a mother of
four, trying to fight
to protect the
health of these kids.
This makes no sense.
And so as I began,
at first I thought
I must have done
something wrong to,
sort of, irk them this badly.
And yet, as I started to share
my story with other moms who
had websites, they
said, oh, my gosh.
You know, there was something
similar that happened to me.
And the more I started
to ask, the more I
realized there were
other people who
had tried to either gain
some kind of momentum,
gain some kind of
presence, and they
had felt the same
kind of push back.
And so I thought, this
just doesn't make sense.
>> REGINA: Let's talk
about who that group is.
Who is F-A-N-N, FANN?
>> O'BRIEN: At the time,
it was the Food Allergy
and Anaphylactic Network, and
it was started by a mother whose
child had had an
allergic reaction.
It was so sincerely
motivated in the beginning.
But, you know, as we
see today, I mean,
there's all kinds of
influence from pressures
that can come into any group
or organization, nonprofit
or for-profit.
And I think what
started to happen
was that that nonprofit,
in 1998, Kraft
became the sole sponsor
of their website.
And you know, again, when I
read that, I mean, I had Kraft
all through my
kitchen cupboards,
so I didn't really
think anything of it.
>> REGINA: Mac and cheese.
Yeah.
>> O'BRIEN: I didn't
think anything of it.
But then I thought, you know,
sole sponsor of the website.
And the more I started to
learn about the changes
to the food supply,
the more I realized,
this isn't on that
website, you know?
And as the push back grew
more and more intense,
they ended up
sending a letter out.
It was kind of a legal letter,
and I took it to my attorney.
And he just said,
this is just meant
to intimidate you,
Robyn, you know?
And I said, well, I don't
see what I have done wrong.
And he pulled together
a legal response
and fired it right back, and
we didn't hear from them again.
But at that point, because
they had been so threatened
by the work, I thought, what
is it about this organization
that they're trying to
control this message so
tightly that they would
be willing to fire
legal letters at a mother of
four who's literally working
to protect the
health of children?
And so at that point,
you know, I thought,
I'm just going to pull
their financial statements
because that's what I did, that
was this background of mine,
you know?
>> REGINA: Following the money.
Right.
>> O'BRIEN: So I just thought,
I'm going to pull the financial
statements.
I'd seen that Kraft was
the sponsor of the website,
and that's when the story
started to fall out.
I started to realize there
were these big food companies,
and these big chemical companies
were funding the organization.
The doctors that were on
the medical board, you know,
were working very closely with
some of these corporations.
And so I thought, well,
technically there's
nothing wrong with this.
It's not disclosed
on their website.
And obviously, if these are the
relationships that they have,
they're probably not
going to be the first ones
to start talking about
some of these issues
that I was starting to
see with the food supply.
And so, again, it
really motivated
me to say, Allergy Kids, again,
has a very unique position,
and a very unique
role to fill here--
>> REGINA: Right.
>> O'BRIEN: --to begin
to really educate people.
Not just in a way that helps
a company sell more EpiPens--
>> REGINA: Right.
>> O'BRIEN: --but that
really starts to say, hey,
we've got a runaway
rates of these diseases.
These are epidemics that
are happening to our kids.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> O'BRIEN: And
they're not genetic.
There's an environmental
trigger here,
and we need to start
focusing on that.
>> REGINA: And there was a
red flag there, certainly,
when you have Kraft
as primary sponsor,
including of the research.
Something's not right
with that picture,
because it's always going
to be skewed toward whoever
the-- I mean, that's just
the nature of research.
It tends to favor
those funding it.
>> O'BRIEN: Well, at the
time, I just thought,
maybe they have an incentive
to learn about food allergies
because, obviously,
this is a core customer.
I mean, I was
willing to give them
the benefit of the
doubt that early on.
But they became so
aggressive against me
that that's when it
started to change.
And I think it was
in the fall of,
like, around October of
2006 when I was still
trying to learn
about food allergies,
and getting everything I
could about food allergies,
because I now was
running this website.
And this little study
popped out where
the EPA had issued a $440,000
grant to some small university.
And the title of the article
was "Do Genetically-Engineered
Foods Cause Food Allergies?".
So this is 2006,
so I'm thinking,
what's a
genetically-engineered food?
Because I've never
heard of that.
And again, to kind of
start down that rabbit
hole, and I'm learning about
genetically-engineered foods,
how they had been
introduced 10 years earlier.
And so here it is, 10 years
later, that the EPA is saying,
do they cause food allergies?
And I'm thinking,
well, why didn't we
ask this question 10
years ago, before this
was introduced into
the food supply?
And again, you know,
that was when--
I mean, truly, I think that's
when the story really began.
I sort of I joke, like, that
beginning stage, with this,
kind of, food allergy
space was preparing me--
>> REGINA: Right.
>> O'BRIEN: --for what
was about to happen.
And so I reached out
to the researcher
there at that university,
and I said, are you
aware of the runway
rates of allergies
we're seeing in children?
The rates, the prescription
of EpiPen is escalating.
Are you aware of this?
And how is this being studied?
And the more that I started
to meet with allergists,
I would sit down with
somebody and I would say,
is a child allergic
to the soy that's
been consumed for
thousands of years,
or are they allergic to this
genetically-engineered soy that
was introduced in 1996?
And I mean, just like my kids
that day, the allergists just
look at you like, what
are you talking about?
And they were so illiterate
on genetically-modified foods.
And at that point
I'm thinking, am I
the only one who didn't
know that we had introduced
these new ingredients
into our food supply?
But the more that I
spoke with allergists
and other organizations,
I realized
how little people knew
about this sudden change.
I mean, it was a huge
fundamental change to the way
that we produced
food in our country.
And so that fall really
began this investigative work
into genetically-engineered
foods,
how they had been
introduced in the 1990s, how
some of the concerns from
the World Health Organization
were over their allergenicity.
And all of a sudden, I'm
sitting on this story
that, in all candor, I didn't
really want to own, you know?
I didn't want to know it.
It was pretty scary.
You know, I was realizing that
there was one corporation that
literally was responsible
for the majority
of these ingredients, of these
genetically-modified foods.
And as I looked at
my kitchen cupboard,
I thought, their ingredients are
in everything in my kitchen--
>> REGINA: Almost everything
processed and prepared.
>> O'BRIEN: --but
it's not labeled.
And I thought, you
know, when I buy Kraft,
or when I would buy
the yogurts, or when
I would buy the Leggo
My Eggo waffles,
you knew the brand
you were buying.
When you buy a shirt,
a car, anything,
you know the brand
you're buying.
And all of a sudden, I
was like, this brand,
this company I've
never heard of.
And to me, again,
I just thought,
I must have been clueless.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
Well, and of course,
most people are clueless.
I mean, unless they've
chosen to make a study of it,
that's true.
And which, thank
God, you took on.
And I have to say, one of
the most shameful moments
in my long media
career was being
enticed into do--
it wasn't enticed,
I was an environmental reporter.
And at that time,
and this was in 1992,
so you can kind of get the time
line of what's about to happen,
Monsanto-- not
knowing at that time
it was Monsanto-- it was
University of California
at Davis who Monsanto was
doing a lot of research there.
And they were introducing
their Flavr Savr tomato, right?
That was kind of the big
thing where it all began.
Tomatoes that won't rot
on the store shelves.
And I did not understand
the ramifications at all
when I did the story on it.
I just put it out there,
hey, this new development
is occurring in agriculture.
And it was years later
before I found out
the nature of what
they were doing.
And Monsanto's-- I mean, you
see the headlines regularly,
Monsanto, most evil
corporation on the planet.
And, you know, if you look at it
in terms of all the subterfuge,
the attempts to shut
people like you up,
stop people from putting
information out and objecting
to it.
Forget all that's going
on around the globe
with those seeds that won't
reproduce and so forth.
You're talking about a fairly
substantial amount of clout
that company has to
stop forward progress,
and having labeling, et cetera.
And this is really what
you've been fighting for.
>> O'BRIEN: Well, you know,
so as I kind of truly stumbled
on this corporation, Monsanto,
and I can remember the night I
pulled up the ticker
symbol, and it's M-O-N,
and out flew this $70
billion company at the time.
And I looked across the
table at my husband, I said,
have you ever heard
of this company?
And he says no.
And I'm like, it's
in everything we eat!
And so, you know,
again, it was like, OK,
I've got to own
this cluelessness
and dig into this thing.
And so as I did,
you know, again,
it was the financial analyst
in me, immediately, I'm like,
this is a brilliant
business model.
This is a chemical company
that is using their chemical
technology to help engineer
certain traits into the food
supply, and as they did it,
they then own that trait.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> O'BRIEN: And it enabled
them to basically patent seeds.
I mean, that had never
been done before, you know?
>> REGINA: Right.
>> O'BRIEN: And so all of
a sudden, in the 1990s,
you've got this new technology
and this whole new operating
system that's being imposed on
farmers and imposed on seeds,
you know.
>> REGINA: I know.
It's horrible.
>> O'BRIEN: I mean, we
grew up with Microsoft,
and you saw what an
operating system did.
And it required that you use
a whole suite of products.
>> REGINA: That's right.
>> O'BRIEN: Well, that's what
the chemical company did.
So it engineered these
seeds so that they
could withstand these
chemicals, you know?
And again, I thought, if I
was on the board of directors,
I would say this is an
amazing business model.
Kudos.
Hats off.
And they didn't even
have to label it,
so nobody knows that
this change has happened.
Meantime, they can just
routinely douse these food
crops like soy and corn
with all of their chemicals.
So I saw the business
model, and it truly
was a brilliant business model.
But as I started to
look it, you know,
and I was analyzing rates of
diseases here in the United
States versus overseas, and
how here in the US, I mean,
the statistics for
autism are escalating.
And overseas in
some countries, it's
so not prevalent, that they
don't even count autism rates,
you know?
So again, I'm kind
of stepping back,
and I'm like, OK, so what
do the other countries do?
And in 1994, the first
genetically-engineered
technology was used to create
this artificial growth hormone.
So they used a
genetically-engineered E coli
bacteria to create this
artificial growth hormone
and inject it into cows, and
help them make more milk.
So again, awesome
business model, you know,
if that's your goal, is to
help these cows make more milk.
But as countries
around the world said,
we were doing the
studies, and we
saw that these cows are getting
really sick with mastitis,
and ovarian cysts,
and skin diseases,
and it was resulting in all
this drug use on these animals,
and all these antibiotics being
pumped into these animals.
Literally, every single
other developed country
around the world said, we don't
want this going into our milk.
We don't know what the long-term
effect of this will be.
And so in 1994, when this
artificial growth hormone found
its way into our milk
supply, the United States
was the only developed country
in the world to allow for it.
And as I looked at it,
I mean, all of a sudden,
I wasn't just rethinking
what I was feeding my kids,
or how I might navigate
the grocery store.
I was having to rethink
something much, much bigger,
and that was really hard.
All of a sudden,
I'm thinking, why
have we been the only
country to introduce
this risk into our
dairy, you know?
And as it was offered
again overseas,
countries overseas,
again, said no, thank you.
We're going to reject the
use of this in our dairy.
And it was showing that it
increased hormone levels linked
to breast, prostate,
and colon cancer.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> O'BRIEN: And so at that
point, you know, again,
as a mother, there was this
night where I was putting
our youngest to bed, and
I just held her, thinking,
how many Sippy Cups have I
poured this milk into, and how
many bowls of cereal have
I put on for my husband,
not knowing that there
could be this elevated risk?
And so it was heartache.
And yet, at the same
time, I thought,
what are the rates of cancer
here versus around the world?
>> REGINA: Well, that's what
I wanted to ask you next,
is when we were talking at
the very top of the show about
the increase in all the--
one-third of the kids had one
of the big four A's, you
know, the asthma, allergies,
and so forth.
What did you find in other
countries that have really
rejected a lot of
these technologies?
>> O'BRIEN: You
know, I mean, again,
it's really tough because
there's so many environmental
factors now that are going into
the rates of diseases today.
I mean, there are 80,000
chemicals that are in use,
and only about 200 of
them have been tested.
So the food industry
would say, you
can't conclusively say that
it is just because we've
genetically-engineered
the food supply,
and are now pouring
400 million pounds more
of chemicals on those crops.
You can't say that,
but at the same time,
the US has the highest
rates of diseases.
You know, whether you're
talking about diabetes,
or obesity, or autism, or
ADHD, allergies, or cancer,
something like 90% of the
world's ADHD medications
are sold here in
the United States.
Well, we only represent 5%
of the world's population.
And so then, there were
also migration studies
showing that if you were to
move to the United States
from somewhere like Japan, your
chance of developing cancer
increases four-fold.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
>> O'BRIEN: You know?
So there were studies
that were indicating
that there were definitely
environmental triggers
to these diseases.
And as I kept poring
into that research,
I was then realizing that
only one in 10 cancers
are genetic, which means
nine out of 10 of them
are non-genetic and
environmentally-triggered.
So as hard as that was to
learn, all of a sudden,
you're realizing we don't
have to be a victim of this.
If we can start to control
some of those environmental
exposures, and exercise
precaution, which
is what countries around
the world said, they said,
you know, we're not going
to introduce this risk
into our food supply.
There's no long-term
human health data.
We have no idea what the
long-term human health
impact will be of a little girl
ingesting artificial growth
hormone from the age
of one through puberty.
We have no idea what
that impact will be.
And so these countries
exercised precaution
and they just
simply kept it out.
They said, this is
a new technology,
without any long-term
track record.
And so, you know, as I was
learning that, I thought,
OK, again, I can see the
business model in this,
and you can see why
the industry fights
so hard to not have it labeled.
Because without
labels, they can say
there is no evidence of harm,
because without that label,
there's no way to
trace the evidence,
there's no accountability,
and there's no liability.
And so without
that traceability,
they're able to say, no evidence
of harm, when really, in fact,
there's just no evidence.
And so as I thought
about that, I
thought, really, how can we
give consumers this same right
to know what they're
eating that has been
given to eaters
around the world?
And it wasn't just in the milk.
It was in 1996 with the soy.
They engineered the
soy beans so that they
could spray these chemicals,
these weed killers, you know?
And as I'm learning about
this weed killer, Roundup,
I'm thinking, that's
the stuff that we're
told as mothers not to put
under our kitchen sink,
and yet, it's the same
stuff that they are just
routinely spraying our
food crops with, you know?
And again, that just
complete inconsistency.
And realizing that we just
had had record amounts of weed
killer sold since
the introduction
of this new technology
and that seed.
And then with the
corn, again, there
was growing concern
in California
about the spraying of
these insecticides.
And so using this
new technology,
they were able to
genetically-engineer
those insecticidal proteins
into the corn plants, you know?
So as it grows, it can
release its own insecticide.
So again, as a mother,
I'm thinking, well,
I know to, like, rinse
my fruit and veggies,
but what do you do when it's
inside the plant, you know?
>> REGINA: What do you
do when it's inside?
Yeah.
Exactly.
>> O'BRIEN: And so as I'm
coming through all of this,
I start to realize that other
countries have exercised a lot
more precaution, and we just
sort of took this approach that
it hasn't yet been
proven dangerous.
We're going to allow
it into the food supply
until it's proven dangerous.
So the industry is able to
market it, profit off of it.
>> REGINA: Powerful lobby.
>> O'BRIEN: Right.
While, you know, any
externalized costs
are falling on the health
of the American public.
And I think as I really started
to realize how sick we are here
in the United States.
I mean, one in three kids
has autism, allergies, ADHD,
or asthma.
The autism rates
are skyrocketing.
It's not just diagnosis anymore.
We're seeing real conditions
in these children, you know?
The sale of EpiPens
is almost up 100%.
It's just real
conditions in these kids.
There was something
in me, again,
where I just
thought, how is this
going to impact our country?
If these kids are too sick
to fight in the military,
or these kids are too sick
to function in a classroom,
how's it going to affect
productivity in the workplace?
>> REGINA: Oh, you bet.
All the way down, I
mean, through what is it
going to do in terms
of chronic diseases
that they're going to be plagued
with as their bodies start
aging in addition?
Particularly if you compound
it with more of the same.
So one thing that I really
like, and I was just thinking,
it might be interesting--
and this is just my thought--
to find out some of the
statistics on all this
in the Netherlands,
because they've
been so progressive
for so many years
to keep so much of this out
of their culture and the food
supply.
I'd be curious to know what
their statistics on the kids
are.
>> O'BRIEN: It'd be
a good benchmark.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
It would be.
But one thing you
discovered along the way
was something about
the proteins that
were involved in the process
of creating the GMOs,
and when we come down to
these kinds of allergies
and autoimmune response,
attacking our own bodies,
a lot of it is protein-based.
Can you talk about what
you found out there?
Because I think that's
pretty critical.
>> O'BRIEN: You know, it was.
I mean, when I was learning
that a food allergy is when
your body sees food
proteins as foreign,
and launches this
inflammatory response
to drive out that foreign
invader, so the food
proteins in an egg, or the
food protein in cow's milk,
or in a soybean.
To then learn that with
genetically-engineered foods,
you are introducing
a new protein
into the food supply that
has never existed before.
And so the scientists
would say, you know,
these are more tested
than any other food
product on the market.
There are no long-term
human health studies.
So you know, that tells
you how weakly tested
a lot of our food supply is,
if this is the most-tested.
But the food protein they're
saying that they introduced,
of course, would
not be one that they
know would trigger an allergy.
What scientists around
the world were concerned
with was that in that process
of genetically-engineering,
of introducing this thing,
the insertion of that protein
creates this cascade of effects.
And that's the part where
these new proteins were being
created, and I was realizing,
as scientists were saying,
they didn't even have names,
or numbers, or anything
to identify these new proteins.
So you literally have created
these things that have never
before existed in
this food supply.
>> REGINA: This kind of that
Frankenfood type of concept.
>> O'BRIEN: I mean,
people will call it that.
Right.
And I don't
necessarily-- I don't
think it needs that much
of an exaggerated nickname.
You've really just thrust
this new thing into the seed
and it's created
something in that thrust.
It's sort of blown
it out and it's
created something
in that thrust.
And that's the concern,
is what has been created,
and what are the
long-term effects here?
And what's so
interesting to me is
that the proteins
that were introduced
with this genetic
engineering were so new,
that these chemical
companies that were doing it
patent them at the US
Patent and Trademark Office.
So over here, they're saying
we've got to patent this.
It's worth a lot of money
to us because it's unique,
it's proprietary, it's
this new technology.
That's what they get at the
Patent and Trademark Office,
but over here at
the FDA, they're
saying it's all the same.
So it's like they want to have
their cake, and eat it, too.
So here at the FDA, they
came up with this term
that it's substantially
equivalent in 1992.
Which basically means
it doesn't look, smell,
or taste any
different, but you've
got a huge compositional
change that's
occurred in our food supply
that's enabled them to patent
it on the one hand,
but here at the FDA,
they're saying don't
worry about it.
It's all the same.
And as I looked at
that, I thought,
you know, why would
the FDA allow for that?
Why would the FDA, our
food agency here in the US,
have such a different standard
to these food agencies
overseas?
Because 27 countries around the
world don't allow these foods,
and over 60 of them label them,
because these food agencies are
basically saying the
jury's still out.
We just don't know.
And yet, here, you
know, the FDA was just
on this completely different
page to everybody else.
And so I looked into
that and started
working with a
researcher at Harvard.
And he basically had
done these studies
showing how if industry
funds the research,
it tends to favor industry--
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> O'BRIEN: --in some hugely
high percentage of the time.
And again, I thought, I'd
seen that as an analyst,
you know, where these companies
would trot out their research
findings, and claim that
their products were safe,
and it's a great
marketing tool when
you need that in the press.
But then, at the
same time, that was
what was happening at the
FDA, was that these companies
were submitting
the safety studies.
There was no independent
study that was conducted.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> O'BRIEN: And when I looked at
that and I wanted to know why,
I was really looking at how we
allocate our national budget,
kind of as a big family.
And I realized that the FDA
was getting so little a slice
that they literally didn't
have any funding or resources
to even be able to conduct
an independent study.
So they had to rely on
industry-funded data.
And at that point,
I'm thinking, this
isn't the first time
we've seen this.
This is the tobacco industry.
>> REGINA: Mm-hm.
Exactly.
Let's start with some-- Let's
get into some of the food,
some of allergens
and components,
and let's start
with baby formula.
If a woman decides
not to breastfeed,
or she's gone off,
say, a month, or two,
or three months into the
process and switched over
to baby formulas that have
soy particularly, and also
talk about the
French government,
and what they've
done about that.
>> O'BRIEN: You know, I mean,
the baby formula situation here
in the United States,
it's less than ideal.
And I'm very sensitive
to the challenges
that a mom is confronted with
when she's dealing with that.
My own sister-in-law had
struggles breastfeeding,
and she was trying so hard,
and so many moms have contacted
me, trying so hard to find a
baby formula that doesn't read
like the side of a science
experiment, you know?
And as I really started
looking into the baby formulas,
realizing there's all
kinds of stuff in this baby
formula that, literally, other
countries around the world
have either banned or removed.
Things like corn syrup, and
all these ingredients that
are synthetic and
artificial, and we
have no idea what the long-term
impact of that might be.
And it was to go to the
food agency in the UK,
I went to the food
agency in France.
And was really looking
into a study that
had been conducted by a
researcher named Gideon Lack
and he had, you know, done
this massive study on kids that
had had peanut
allergy, and realized
a really high
correlation with those
that had been fed soy formula.
And so I thought, you
know, why aren't we
talking about this here?
Why aren't we talking about
this potential cross-reactivity
between the peanut and the soy.
A child's immune system
is so immature and not
yet fully developed in
that first year of life.
And you know, if
other countries are
saying use soy formula
as a last resort.
I was realizing here
in the United States
that one in four babies were
on this soy formula because
of these cow milk allergies
that we were seeing.
And so, you know, again,
you kind of pull back
and you're realizing that
the rest of the world
is having this conversation
and this dialogue,
and they are doing
everything they
can to protect the
health of the children.
And for the US, as I
was looking at that,
I thought, OK, we
haven't done that.
These kids have earned the
title generation of RX,
and I can see the
recurring revenue model
in a child that's
sick, you know?
I mean, that's a
recurring revenue model
for the pharmaceutical
company, which is just--
it's heartache to
see it that way,
but that is what can be seen
when you realize a child is
a diabetic or allergy
kid for a lifetime.
But countries around
the world were saying,
we don't want that
recurring revenue model
on the backs of these kids.
And as I thought
about that in the US,
I thought, they're only
30% of the population,
but they're 100% of
the future, you know?
And it may be a
recurring revenue model
now that these
pharmaceutical companies are
able to profit off of all
these rates of diseases
we're seeing in these
kids, but what's
the long-term effect of this
going to be on our economy,
you know?
And already, we're
already spending $0.17
of every dollar managing disease
and on health care costs.
And I thought, you look at
how sick these children are,
with these chronic conditions,
and the escalating costs
of caring for these kids.
And I think probably
one of the things that
has surprised me the
most in the eight years
that I've been doing this is
how quickly those rates have
escalated.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> O'BRIEN: And in a weird way,
it's a blessing in disguise.
The doctor that wrote
the forward to my book,
he said that.
He said, these children are
canaries in the coal mine.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
>> O'BRIEN: And if we
hadn't had that moment,
that morning where my
daughter had that reaction,
we would never have learned how
to clean up our food and what
we were eating.
So it really is a
blessing in disguise.
But I think it's forcing--
parents are really
going to be the first to
the front line on this,
because suddenly, we're just
paying out the nose when it
comes to treating these
conditions and these diseases.
I mean, eczema creams
are hugely expensive.
The cost of EpiPen, asthma
inhaler's hugely expensive.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> O'BRIEN: And once you start
to add all of those things
on top of each other,
suddenly, the mom is saying,
there's got to be
a better answer.
>> REGINA: Well, I've
talked to various doctors,
and there are those who
have told me that they have
the stream of
people, of drug reps,
coming through their
office every day.
And the agenda's really simple.
From the cradle to the grave,
you want them on something.
That's the business
model of it all.
Which it is.
Well, it's kind
of soul-destroying
to think that that's
actually going on, but it is.
And I mean, you're right.
It is going to be up
to the parents that
are going to have to
spearhead the efforts
and take responsibility
for not just educating
themselves, but
feeding their children
in a very dynamic,
healthful, different way.
And that means unplugging
from most of the systems,
unfortunately.
And I wanted to get back to
the whole subject of formula.
You didn't raise
your kids on formula.
Once they switched over,
they switched to milk, right?
To cow's milk?
>> O'BRIEN: Well, you
know, we did use formula.
I mean, we did use
some formula, and it
wasn't until that
fourth child, where
I was waking up to how we
had all of these ingredients
in our food that
literally hadn't
been there when we were kids.
And I think that's
sort of the deception,
is that it's the same box
of Kraft Mac and cheese,
it's the same yogurt
company, but there
are new and different
ingredients in those things.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
I misread that then.
I thought you had said that
your kids were on cow's milk.
Well, let's follow that
model out for just a moment.
So then we have the bovine
growth hormone issue,
so we have more
allergies happening
as a result of those things
being shot into the animals.
But what about the notion
of using organic or even
raw milks from another
species, such as goats or cows?
Do you have any
kind of information
on how the babies
these days that
might be responding to that?
>> O'BRIEN: I don't personally
have that kind of information.
But I know that there
are moms out there
who are trying all of these
different alternatives.
We see all kinds of
alternative in the marketplace
to cow's milk.
>> REGINA: Are there some good
alternative formulas out there?
>> O'BRIEN: There are
starting to be, you know?
And what's fascinating, I asked
somebody that the other day,
and they said, you've got
to go to countries overseas.
I mean, countries overseas
have developed these formulas
that are of a much
higher quality.
And again, you know, we
have these multinational
corporations here in the
US, so let's lean on them
to bring these products home.
Because that was
one of the things
that I started to
notice, was that if we
allow all of these ingredients
into our food that literally
have changed the chemical
composition of our food supply,
and the products
all look the same,
but they've just been
polluted with all
of these new ingredients, those
same multinational American
corporations, they
still sell overseas.
So when I looked
at that, I thought,
they're not including these
ingredients in the products
they sell overseas.
They're formulating
things differently.
And that truly hit me just
like a bowling ball to the gut.
>> REGINA: That's very sad.
Yes, this is very sad.
>> O'BRIEN: You're
just thinking,
they have not placed the
same value on the lives
of the American kid that they
placed on the lives of these
other kids.
And so--
>> REGINA: Well, because their
governments have demanded it,
otherwise they wouldn't be
able to enter the market,
so it's just demands.
>> O'BRIEN: In some cases, the
governments have demanded it.
In some cases,
consumers led, you know.
For example--
>> REGINA: Yeah, that's true.
>> O'BRIEN: --the
artificial dyes.
I mean, moms in the
UK just realized
that they wanted to get it out.
There was a study
called the Southampton
Study that have been done.
And it just showed
this incredible impact
that these dyes would have
on the behavior of kids,
and hyperactivity,
and everything else.
It was conducted again
seven years later,
and it was so compelling to the
parents, the kids, the doctors,
the scientists, that the
American corporations-- so
the Walmarts, and the Krafts,
and the Coca-Cola said,
you know what, we're
going to voluntarily
remove artificial dyes from the
products that we sell to kids.
And so it was ahead of
any legislation, you know?
And again--
>> REGINA: That's
the best scenario.
>> O'BRIEN: --I can remember
reading through quotes from
these, you know, Kraft, and
Coca-Cola about how they were
so willing to work
with the consumer.
And that's, again,
when I thought,
this needs to be a movement here
in the United States, you know,
people need to know this.
>> REGINA: They do.
And now, let's go to eggs.
A lot of kids have
allergies to eggs,
but most people are
not aware of the fact
that eggs are the medium
in which their vaccines are
grown as well.
And so this is
being injected in,
alongside these other
pathogens from the age of three
months and even earlier on.
Now, what have you found
out about the repercussions
of that?
>> O'BRIEN: You know,
it was interesting.
I mean, the eggs were
close to my heart,
because that was my
daughter, so suddenly we
were kind of at a standstill
with certain vaccines
because they were egg-based.
And as I started learning about
genetically-engineered foods,
I realized that in
countries like France,
they don't even want
genetically-engineered
soybeans, or corn,
the thing that we
feed to all the animals we
eat, the chickens, the cows,
and everything else.
In the US, those
cows and everything
eat the
genetically-engineered food.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> O'BRIEN: In other countries,
they say no, thank you.
We don't want our animals
eating it either, you now?
So not only are they not
feeding it to their people,
but they don't even
want to feed it
to their cows or their chickens.
So as I looked into
that, I thought,
you know, so then
if a chicken is
fed genetically-modified
food, what happens to the egg?
And in France, for
example, that egg
is labeled as having
come from chicken
that was fed
genetically-modified food.
So it is labeled all the
way through the food chain.
So I contacted a
researcher at Harvard
and I said, what is
the difference here?
What's the impact
of a vaccine being
grown in an organic
egg-- what we now
have to give the adjective,
organic, whereas before, it
was just an egg--
versus this egg that
comes from an animal that's
been genetically-engineered fed?
And she laughed.
She said, we have no idea.
We have no idea.
Those studies have
not been conducted.
And you know, again,
it was that realization
that these kids,
as Dr. Bach said,
are canaries in a coal mine.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> O'BRIEN: And that there is so
much that we can do to protect
their health, but we
have to be mindful,
and we have to
get the knowledge.
One of the best vaccine
books that I know of
is a book called "The Vaccine
Book" by Dr. Bob Sears.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> O'BRIEN: His dad,
Dr. William Sears,
has been a pediatric expert
in this country for decades.
He and his wife have written, I
don't know, eight or 10 books.
And he was one of the first
to really sound the alarm
that soy formula,
soy-based formula,
may present risk to
certain children.
And as I was
researching him, that's
when I learned about his
son, and kind of contacted
the whole family.
And Dr. Sears' book on
vaccines, it's very informative.
And again, and I think
as parents today,
with the title
generation RX slapped
across the front of
our kids, we need
to have as much
information as we
can so that we can make
these informed choices.
>> REGINA: And it is difficult,
because you do have to end up
fighting the system a
good part of the way.
I mean, part of the home
schooling initiative in general
has been to keep kids
out from under the burden
of having those vaccines.
I mean, for example,
this is taking
some-- you're having
to kind of circumvent
the whole system as a
parent to a large extent.
I mean, I know that
there are certain states
you can have the child put
in school with certain kind
of-- what is the
word I'm looking for?
Where they have exceptions,
such as a religious exception
and so forth, or some
medical exception
written by some
medical professional.
But by and large, you can't
even put your kids in school
without them having
been vaccinated.
>> O'BRIEN: I mean, again,
I think the system that
we've inherited, and
then the assumptions,
and the rules that we sort of
intended to follow, you know,
in our parents' footsteps,
all of a sudden,
we're realizing it just
flat out doesn't work.
>> REGINA: It doesn't work.
No.
>> O'BRIEN: This
generation of kids--
>> REGINA: Well, and also we
had just a few vaccines as kids.
These guys have what?
Up to 90 before
the age of seven?
>> O'BRIEN: Yeah.
It is some jaw-dropping number.
But you know, I think,
again, Dr. Sears was
smart in his book, because he
suggests a delayed schedule,
basically acknowledging that
a child's immune system is
still vulnerable and not fully
developed in the early stages.
And again, I think,
more importantly,
especially given the rates of
these diseases, the seriousness
of food allergies.
I mean, that some kid
can be mildly allergic,
and another kid can
have that same amount
and go into a life-threatening
allergic reaction.
And so it's becoming
increasingly hard to sort
of mandate a one-size-fits-all
system on these children.
And I think that's why you start
to see these parents popping up
with these different
organizations, you know?
Cancer is the leading
cause of death
by disease in kids under
the age of 15 today,
and the rates are escalating.
You know, somebody
who's a naysayer
is going to dismiss
it and say, well,
that's because we cured measles,
or mumps, and everything else.
But how do you explain
the escalating rate
of pediatric cancer?
How do you explain that
there are pediatric cancer
hospitals going in
around the country?
>> REGINA: Yes, indeed.
>> O'BRIEN: How do you explain
that you've got oncologists
writing Op-Eds in the New
England Journal of Medicine
saying, if we don't address
these runaway rates of cancer,
it's going to buckle
our health care system.
And so again, that's where we've
all inherited these systems,
and it is hard to acknowledge.
I mean, you look
at that health care
system in which sickness sells.
I mean, that's what keeps
those companies in business.
You know, the
United Healthcare--
>> REGINA: That's who has
the money on Capitol Hill.
That's who has the money.
And those are the lobbyists.
>> O'BRIEN: So I think it's
really truly where it gets
to be a grassroots movement, but
I also think that the private
sector is starting to
come in with solutions.
And interestingly, it's because
those escalating health care
costs are hammering
the companies.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
>> O'BRIEN: And you've got
a company like Starbucks
who's spending almost as much on
their health care costs as they
are on their coffee.
So suddenly, they can't be
as profitable, and lucrative,
and drive their core
competency the way they could,
because they're all tied
up managing disease.
So they want to figure out a way
to get their employees healthy,
and I think you
really are starting
to see these grassroots,
market-driven solutions.
>> REGINA: And let's
talk about labeling laws.
I mean, I know a lot of people
were very disappointed recently
when Whole Foods announced that
they were going to kind of slow
it down and take a few years
before they decided to label
their genetically-modified
organisms in the food supply.
What did you dig up when
you were researching this?
I mean, why do they have to
wait three or four years?
>> O'BRIEN: That's a
really good question,
and it's really important
that people understand why.
Whole Foods has not only organic
companies in their store,
but a lot of the owners of
these smaller organic companies
are the Nestles, and the Krafts,
and these larger conglomerates.
>> REGINA: Disney, M&M--
>> O'BRIEN: Right.
>> REGINA: --and on and on.
>> O'BRIEN: And so these
companies are not going to want
to label genetically-engineered
ingredients, because, again,
it brings that accountability,
liability, traceability.
So as companies,
they're probably
going to want to shift out
of the genetically-engineered
ingredient into something
else, and formulate
the way they do overseas.
So they're going to want
to bring that manufacturing
process home.
The problem is that we
don't have that supply here
in the United States.
Soybeans are now upward of
90% genetically-modified--
>> REGINA: Right, right.
>> O'BRIEN: --so we kind of
have a bottleneck on the supply
of non-genetically-engineered
soybeans.
So in order to convert fields
from genetically-engineered
soybeans to
non-genetically-engineered,
it takes three years.
And so I think by offering
that five-year period,
they're basically saying,
hey, you can label it,
or you can just get it out.
>> REGINA: That's interesting.
That makes total sense.
Just, again, following
the time frame
of what it takes to
turn those crops over.
You're right, three
years, isn't it?
>> O'BRIEN: And I think what's
interesting is I've heard from
these global corporations.
I used to lump big foods, sort
of, all together, not at all.
There are certain
corporations that I
have worked with who have high
level executives with sons
with autism, you know?
>> REGINA: Right.
>> O'BRIEN: And
the dad has said,
your work has changed my life.
And I said, well, then
we can't just sit here.
We have to do something.
And I know that they're
trying to figure out a way
to create change, and
that's where, again, I
think this grassroots
movement is so critical.
Because not only does it give
politicians a political cover
to start voting for more
aggressive labeling practices,
but it also gives these
companies political cover
to then go to these boards of
directors, who may or may not
realize how much this situation
has advanced so quickly.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> O'BRIEN: To be able to
go to that board and say,
you know what?
Yeah, that initiative in
California that was demanding
labelling failed, but 6 million
people in California want
the right to know
what's in their food,
and at what point does it
become the financial obligation
of that company to start
to respond to this consumer
demand.
And so that's where I think,
you know, in these corporations,
in these big food
corporations, are parents just
like all of us.
And they need the political
cover to do the right thing.
I mean, they are in
a very broken system.
Their jobs drive profitability
straight to the bottom line,
and that means use the
cheapest ingredients possible.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
>> O'BRIEN: But it's
starting to boomerang back,
because now they're paying all
this for their own health care
costs.
So we're really at this point, I
think, where the consumer could
play an incredibly
important and valuable role.
>> REGINA: I agree.
Let's talk about how we
protect our own families
and our own kids.
I mean, anybody who
isn't already aware
that their child is reacting
to a food in a certain way
as a result of an allergy
probably has a clue of it now.
So let's talk about how you
start feeding kids once you
realize that soy is in almost
every processed and packaged
food, just as one example.
>> O'BRIEN: So as I was looking
at this little one that had
this kind of traditional--
>> REGINA: Right.
>> O'BRIEN: --allergic
reaction that you read about,
where the girl kisses her
boyfriend and has the allergic
reaction, this immediate,
life-threatening reaction.
This delayed food
allergic reaction
can present as eczema, or
chronic ear infections,
or bronchial stuff.
And so all of a sudden, I
was looking at my other kids
realizing, you know, these guys
have something going on, too.
So once I kind of started to
look at the spectrum of food
allergies, from kind of
severe to these, kind of,
mildly-annoying things,
really, I thought,
we've just got to clean it up.
And there was this moment
where I stood in the kitchen
and literally looked in
my kitchen cupboards,
and I just thought, I do not
even know where to start,
you know?
I mean, boxes of mac and
cheese, tubes of blue yogurt,
frozen nuggets in the freezer.
I mean, it was so bad.
And I thought, I've
got to start somewhere.
And so for us, we started with
getting that artificial growth
hormone out of the dairy.
It was, to me--
>> REGINA: So you went to
organic on your milk supply,
or you cut the milk?
>> O'BRIEN: We went organic
on the milk, initially,
and then we were traveling
and we didn't have access
to organic milk.
And so I just
thought, I can't buy
the stuff that's polluted
with all this stuff.
And so we just went a
week without the milk,
and that's when one of
the boys just, like,
immediately improved.
>> REGINA: Yes.
Absolutely.
>> O'BRIEN: And I thought, It
cannot be that simple or that
obvious.
Surely somebody would
have told me this.
And we came home and he
went back on the milk,
and just immediately
tanked again.
And so I thought, I'm
going to take him of it.
And again, what I would
suggest to any parent is,
find a doctor that's willing
to work with you on this.
Older generation doctors
sometimes are very entrenched.
They were schooled a
long, long time ago,
before we talked
about organic food,
before we talked about GMOs or
genetically-engineered food,
long before high-fructose
corn syrup was introduced.
So they haven't had
the schooling on this.
Doctors that are younger, that
may have young kids themselves,
are much more up to
speed on the research.
The American Academy
of Pediatrics
just issued a report
on organic food,
because what they
were seeing was
that all these patients were
coming into the doctor's
offices and they were asking the
pediatricians these questions.
The pediatricians
didn't know the answer.
What is the value
of organic food?
Well, it's not as
contaminated with
genetically-engineered
ingredients.
It's not as contaminated
with pesticides,
and all these chemicals.
So, you know, as we started
to make those changes,
yes, the first was
switching to organic milk.
Then it was simply--
I just simply tried
to eat less processed food.
And I just-- I kept
telling the kids
we're just going to
eat less fake food.
I mean, we were snack
packs, everything was fake.
And so I thought, I'm
going to take that pack--
>> REGINA: Were they
good sports about it?
>> O'BRIEN: Well, I did it in
baby steps, because I thought,
I didn't potty train
them overnight.
>> REGINA: Sure.
>> O'BRIEN: And I didn't
wean them from a Sippy Cup
overnight.
So literally, I had
all this mac and cheese
with fluorescent stuff in
the cupboards, and I thought,
I'll just use half
the packet of powder.
And we weaned them off of
it, and we went at a pace
that they were OK
with, we were OK with,
the family budget was OK with.
I mean, again, there's so
many things you're considering
as you start to
make the changes.
>> REGINA: So now we look at
the whole notion of an industry
that is trying to accommodate
these various allergies.
At least, that's what
it appears to be.
And so you have, for
example, gluten-free foods
are labeled very easily.
So if you have something
that say gluten-free,
all organic
ingredients, does that
guarantee that it's not
going to contain GMOs?
>> O'BRIEN: If it
says USDA organic,
which is that little symbol.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> O'BRIEN: Which, quite
honestly at the time,
I thought was just like
a little marketing tool,
it actually represents a
legal standard of production,
and by law, it means that
artificial growth hormones,
artificial dyes,
genetically-engineered
ingredients are not allowed to
be included in the production
process for that.
So by law, that
USDA organic symbol
means that it's free from all
of these artificial ingredients
that are new, that
have been introduced
in the last 10 or 20 years.
>> REGINA: So it seems to
me, that's really the easiest
and first course of action.
And I know it's more
expensive, so this
is where it gets down to
a lot of consumer choices.
But it seems the first thing is
to go organic across the board.
>> O'BRIEN: Well, you know,
and I mean, again, like,
in a perfect world, you'd be
able to say every American
should eat organic, but as
I really looked at the cost
of organic food--
>> REGINA: It's expensive.
>> O'BRIEN: --you know, I'm
realizing this is way more
expensive, and why?
Well, as a national
family, as a big family,
our budget is being
used to support
the growing of the food with
the genetically-engineered
and the chemicals.
And then the farmers
that are growing
things organically, which means,
by law, without all this stuff,
have to pay fees
to prove it's safe,
then have to pay
fees to label it.
So their whole cost of
production is higher.
And as I looked at
that, I thought,
there's no American
that would choose this.
These are our taxpayer
dollars, and shouldn't we
start to make enough noise
to where these taxpayer
dollars are being used to
support organic agriculture, as
opposed to the stuff that's so--
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
>> O'BRIEN:
--chemically-intensive.
>> REGINA: But what
about another option,
and that is to buy organic
ingredients which aren't that
expensive, and then start
making things ourselves again?
Just get back in the
kitchen, roll the sleeves up,
make healthy little snacks,
and take the time to do it.
I mean, the thing
is, our mothers,
and our mothers' mothers
made our little snacks.
We didn't go for the
quick and easy choice.
So how does your story
interface with the fact
that we have to take
personal responsibility
for some production
on our own here?
>> O'BRIEN: You know,
you do, but again,
I think you can't make the
perfect the enemy of the good,
and so we sort of have this
notion of this apron-clad
grandmother making
these big pies.
It's like, it doesn't have
to be that complicated.
Beans and rice is pretty simple.
And so--
>> REGINA: Right.
>> O'BRIEN: --it doesn't have
to be the five-course meal.
And I think it's giving
yourself permission to,
sort of, let go of those
expectations, and saying this
is modern day society, and we
do have two working parents, so
what's it going to look like?
I mean, maybe it's
quesadillas and beans.
It doesn't have to
be some meal that's--
>> REGINA: Yeah,
that's cool, too.
But at least--
>> O'BRIEN: --been cooking
for five hours, you know?
>> REGINA: Yeah.
And I'm just saying that
organic prepared foods
are really expensive.
However, organic
ingredients aren't, per se.
And even if you say,
like, an organic tortilla,
for example, and a raw cheese,
or something like that.
A person can do that, and
that's still fairly convenient.
But I'm speaking more of
the little convenient things
we give our kids, like if
you want to give them snacks.
Maybe you do one
batch on a Sunday.
A batch of something
that can kind of
last the week that's healthier.
>> O'BRIEN: Well, exactly.
And if you really look into
packaged and processed foods,
I mean, the majority
of the cost associated
with that is with the marketing.
And you know--
>> REGINA: Exactly.
>> O'BRIEN: --licensing Dora
the Explorer and all of these
figures--
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> O'BRIEN: --to help
sell those products.
And so as you realize that you
can just make these baby steps,
you know?
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> O'BRIEN: And I mean,
we did the snack packs.
And so then, all of a sudden,
I was showing up after school
with oranges and
apples, you know?
And so it was just a--
>> REGINA: Very cool.
>> O'BRIEN: --very slight shift.
>> REGINA: That's right.
>> O'BRIEN: But it was taking
those baby steps that we were
able to do it.
>> REGINA: We only have
a couple minutes left.
Very quickly, what
about the whole notion,
I think it's called
the hygiene hypothesis,
about the fact that we're
sterilizing ourselves to death,
so to speak?
Because kids aren't able to
just get down and get grubby
with some of the
stuff their bodies
may need to start building a
healthy digestive and immune
system.
>> O'BRIEN: Yeah.
Exactly.
I mean, it's kind of
this Purell theory
that, like, we are all
manic with hand sanitizer,
and somehow, that's
disrupting the immune system.
I think if you're going to talk
about the hygiene hypothesis,
you also have to talk
about all this junk that's
being pumped into animals
and into our food.
And so if--
>> REGINA: Right.
>> O'BRIEN: --the meat we eat
is suddenly full of all kinds
of things like chlorine, and
antibiotics like the chicken is
today-- I mean, that's
what they use to treat it--
that is having a pretty major
impact on a child's immune
system.
And so, yeah, the
hygiene hypothesis,
you can talk about
it externally,
but let's talk about
it internally, too.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
I couldn't agree more.
OK.
We only have a minute left.
What can a person do
to start becoming--
besides reading your book, which
is very well-done, by the way,
"The Unhealthy Truth"-- what
else can they do to start
becoming very active, and
taking an active role in taking
their kids' health back?
>> O'BRIEN: Well, as we
really got into this,
Allergy Kids is a
501(c)(3) nonprofit,
and our work is advocacy work.
And also creating
awareness so that we
can start to fund the science.
One of the things
we want to be doing
is what we call the
Pregnancy Project, where
you can take moms and put
them on an organic diet.
And we can see what
the impact of that
can be over the
lifetime, and see
what these rates of disease.
Let's see a drop in autism,
and cancer, and allergies,
and things like that.
So go to allergykids.com, where
you can join the family there.
There's so many
organizations like Just Label
It who are really
out there, helping
to push for the labeling of
genetically-engineered food,
saying, you know, the FDA does
have the authority to do this.
We don't need to
wait for legislation.
And really to engage
in your communities,
because I think there
are so many people that
are so passionate.
Find a friend, get
involved, because it really
is fun creating this change,
and it's so important.
>> REGINA: How do you
like your life these days,
compared to when you were
wearing your little heels
and business suit every
day on Wall Street?
>> O'BRIEN: You know, I
mean, I loved those guys.
It was a great job.
And it was fun and it was
really-- it was an amazing job.
But I think to be part
of a movement that
is so critical to the
health of our families
and the health of our
countries, I'm so grateful,
because I'm just inspired every
day by the stories that I hear.
I mean, I just heard
from a military mom,
you hear from grandparents, and
for that, I'm just so grateful.
>> REGINA: Well, I'm sure
they're very grateful to you
as well.
And thank you so much
for all the hard work.
You are a warrioress.
>> O'BRIEN: Thank you.
>> REGINA: I hope
this has helped.
You can further your
education on this
by picking up a copy of
her book, "The Unhealthy
Truth," at Amazon and
other major booksellers.
You can also check out Robyn's
website, allergykids.com.
Meanwhile, it's
up to us to become
the advocate for our children.
The system is not going
to do this for us.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]